title:: Thesis on Human - Waste
author:: Aron Petau
date:: April 2025
bibliography:: /Users/aron/thesis/thesis.bib
public:: true
exclude-from-graph-view:: false
tags:: recycling, material-study, workshop, object-value

- # Human - Waste: Recycling in Social Contexts
	- ## A thesis examining the transformative potential for society of plastic recycling practices and their cultural implications
		- ### April 2025
			- By Aron Petau  
			  <aron@petau.net>  
			  4044967
			- https://aron.petau.net
	- ### Master's Thesis
		- Design and Computation,  
		  New Practice in Art and Technology,
		- https://www.newpractice.net
		- Universität der Künste Berlin, Technische Universität Berlin  
		  October 2024 - April 2025
	- ### Supervisors
		- **First Supervisor:**  
		  Maria Kyrou  
		  InKüLe @ UdK Berlin
		- https://www.udk-berlin.de/en/person/maria-kyrou/
		- **Second Supervisor:**  
		  Prof. Albert Lang  
		  New Practice in Art and Technology  
		  UdK Berlin / TU Berlin
			- https://www.newpractice.net/author/albert-lang
	- ## Introduction
		- ### Why Plastics?
			- Plastics have become both a cornerstone of modern innovation and a symbol of environmental degradation. As someone immersed in 3D printing, I frequently confront the challenges of sustainability. The majority of 3D-printed parts are never recycled; instead, they contribute to the growing global waste problem. The 3D printer itself is indifferent to what it prints, concerned only with material purity and dimensional accuracy, yet the materials it uses often demand virgin plastic, perpetuating a cycle of consumption and waste.
			Germany, as one of the leading producers and consumers of plastics, exemplifies the systemic reliance on virgin materials. Although some recycled filaments are available on the market, they are typically costlier and of lower quality, discouraging widespread adoption. This disparity highlights a fundamental issue: the economic infeasibility of a robust, scalable recycling process for plastics. The core challenge lies in identifying and separating materials efficiently—a technological and logistical hurdle not yet overcome.
			Despite these challenges, the willingness of individuals to engage in recycling is evident. However, existing systems fall short of empowering individuals to recycle effectively. This disconnect raises the question: how can we reimagine the lifecycle of plastic, fostering both ecological sustainability and human agency?
			This thesis explores potential answers to this question through theoretical insights and practical experimentation. By examining the intersections of human behavior, waste systems, and design innovation, it aims to uncover opportunities for a socially transformative relationship with plastic. The goal is to shift perspectives, treating plastic not as waste, but as a resource capable of enduring value.

			With the backdrop of plastic waste as a global challenge, a collaborative workshop format is born, which tries to change perspectives on plastic objects surrounding us and playfully exploring whether a co-creative learning process can contribute to a change in behavior towards waste. To support the Workshop, a novel archival practice is outlined and tested. The Archive is a semi-permanent knowledge structure, used both for teaching and documentation purposes. 

		- ### Cultural Framework
			- ```mermaid
			  graph TD;
			      A[fa:fa-vial Testing] -->|Process| B[fa:fa-print Production];
			      B -->|Manufacture| C[fa:fa-cube Object];
			      C -->|Distribute| D[fa:fa-map-marker Local];
			      D -->|Collect| E[fa:fa-trash Sorting];
			      E -->|Recycle| F[fa:fa-shredder Shredding];
			      F -->|Reprocess| G[fa:fa-industry Extrusion];
			      G -->|Reuse| A;
			  ```
	- ## The Machines
		- The Workflow is largely machine driven, i will discuss a few of them in more detail here.
		- ### The Shredder
		  id:: 67a4ecd5-4310-4d7a-9609-92f838bfccc0
			- The Precious Plastic Shredder is a versatile tool designed to efficiently break down plastic waste into small, manageable flakes, making it easier to process and recycle into new materials. Its robust design accommodates a wide variety of plastic types, enabling the creation of sustainable, high-quality outputs from discarded items. By offering an accessible and affordable solution, the shredder empowers individuals and communities to actively engage in local recycling initiatives and foster circular economies.
			- <iframe width="400" height="400" src="https://b2b.partcommunity.com/community/partcloud/embedded.html?route=embedded&name=Shredder+Basic+V2.0&model_id=96649&portal=b2b&showDescription=true&showLicense=false&showDownloadButton=false&showHotspots=true&noAutoload=false&autoRotate=true&hideMenu=false&topColor=%23dde7ed&bottomColor=%23ffffff&cameraParams=false&varsettransfer=" frameborder="1" id="EmbeddedView-Iframe-96649" allowfullscreen></iframe>
			- [[@Academy - Precious Plastic]]
		- ### The Filastruder
			- This is the Filastruder, designed and made by Tim Elmore, in an attempt to create the cheapest viable way to extrude plastic. The biggest cost issue is the tight industrial tolerances in thickness that have to be adhered to. This is in essence what separates good from the bad filament. The industry standard nowadays is at +-0.03mm. Hard to achieve on a DIY setup, but not unheard of. The setup, like any bigger industry equivalent, consists of a motor pressing plastic pellets through a heated screw, extruding molten plastic at the end through a nozzle, and setting the diameter. The leftmost machine is responsible for winding the filament properly onto a spool.
			  
			  Here you can see the extrusion process in action.
			- [[@Filastruder Kit]]
			- The Filastruder is controlled by an Arduino and is highly configurable. The laser sensor visible in the video is already working, but I am missing more direct control over the diameter of the filament.
			  
			  When it all really comes down to the single variable of the filament diameter responsible for the quality of my recycled project, a simple Machine Learning optimization directly jumps at me: I have a few variables like winder speed, extrusion speed, heat, and cooling intensity. These variables can be optimized on the fly for an exact diameter. This is actually roughly how virgin filament is produced, commercial facilities just manage much faster.
			- ```mermaid
			  graph TD
			      A["Winder speed<br>- controlled via laser"] --> D["Filament Diameter<br>- has to be consistent<br>- has to be a circle --> advanced systems measure ovality also"]
			      B["Extrusion speed<br>- function of motor wattage and plastic resistance (temperature)"] --> D
			      C["Cooling intensity<br>- function of extrusion speed and fan speed"] --> D
			      E["Heat<br>- I can set the temp of the heating elements<br>- location and number of heating elements"] --> D
			      
			      D --> A
			      D --> B
			      D --> C
			      D --> E
			  ```
		- ### The Sandwich Press
		  id:: 67a4ecd5-86d1-4eb2-8aa5-cc377492b09d
			- In order to create sheet goods, some kind of flattening heat source is needed. After a bit of research into cost-effecticve solutions, a ribless sandwich maker was used. It is limited to sheets the size of A4 paper. Some modification might be necessary to ensure level sheets, since the pressure is only applied along the center axis, but for the first tests, this is sufficient.
			  It is comfortably reaching 200°C, which is enough for all plastics used in the context of the thesis. Some optimization could be achieved here by adding some form of Oven to keep plastic warm and enable larger batch sizes.
			  TODO: report on whether an oven was added
		- ```mermaid
		  flowchart LR
		      title[The Plastics Recycling Process]
		  
		      C[Cleaning] --> A[Shredding]
		      A -->|Sorting, Composition| B[Melting]
		      B --> D[Extrusion]
		      D --> E[Sheet Forming]
		      E --> F[Quality Control]
		      F --> G[Finished Products]
		  
		      D1[Filastruder] -->|Used for| D
		      E1[Sandwich Maker] -->|Used for| E
		  
		      subgraph "Recycling Stages"
		          C
		          A
		          B
		          D
		          E
		          F
		      end
		  
		      subgraph "Machines"
		          D1
		          E1
		      end
		  
		      subgraph "End Products"
		          G
		      end
		  ```
		- ## The Materials
			- There is hundreds of types of plastics, again with hundreds of additives like pigment for colors, or softeners or stiffeners, or even non-plastics like the wood-filament everybody loves. There is Composites, Batches, Virgin and Recycled... There is simply Too much to take care of in this Format. Therefore, we will deal with a dramatically condensed version of potential Plastics Materials.
			- In 1971, the Society of the Plastics (http://www.socplas.org) established a standard for sorting Plastics that still prevails in much of the world. These Categories are so important, they have their own unicode symbol.
			- ```mermaid
			  graph LR
			      subgraph Plastics
			          PET["♳\n**Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET or PETE)**"]
			          HDPE["♴\n**High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE)**"]
			          PVC["♵\n**Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)**"]
			          LDPE["♶\n**Low-Density Polyethylene (LDPE)**"]
			          PP["♷\n**Polypropylene (PP)**"]
			          PS["♸\n**Polystyrene (PS)**"]
			          Other["♹\n**Other Plastics**"]
			      end
			  
			      PET --> PET1([Soft drink bottles])
			      PET --> PET2([Water bottles])
			      PET --> PET3([Food packaging])
			  
			      HDPE --> HDPE1([Milk jugs])
			      HDPE --> HDPE2([Detergent bottles])
			      HDPE --> HDPE3([Toys])
			  
			      PVC --> PVC1([Pipes])
			      PVC --> PVC2([Window frames])
			      PVC --> PVC3([Flooring])
			  
			      LDPE --> LDPE1([Plastic bags])
			      LDPE --> LDPE2([Cling film])
			      LDPE --> LDPE3([Squeezable bottles])
			  
			      PP --> PP1([Bottle caps])
			      PP --> PP2([Food containers])
			      PP --> PP3([Automotive parts])
			  
			      PS --> PS1([Disposable coffee cups])
			      PS --> PS2([Plastic food boxes])
			      PS --> PS3([Cutlery])
			  
			      Other --> Other1([Sunglasses])
			      Other --> Other2([DVDs])
			      Other --> Other3([Water cooler bottles])
			  ```
			- ♸
			- ♹
				- Others Test
					- Anything that is unlabeled falls into this Category,
			-
				- Graphics adapted from [[@Identification of Polymers]]
			- ```mermaid
			  graph TD
			      A[Water Test] -->|Sinks| B[<b>Copper Wire Test</b>]
			      A -->|Floats| C[<b>Alcohol Test</b>]
			  
			      B -->|Green Flame| D[PVC]
			      B -->|Orange Flame| E[<b>Acetone Test</b>]
			      E -->|Reaction| F[PS]
			      E -->|No Reaction| G[<b>Heat Test</b>]
			      G -->|Reaction| H[PETE]
			  
			      C -->|Sinks| I[HDPE]
			      C -->|Floats| J[<b>Oil Test</b>]
			      J -->|Sinks| K[LDPE]
			      J -->|Floats| L[PP]
			  
			      %% Style leaf nodes
			      style D fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			      style F fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			      style H fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			      style I fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			      style K fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			      style L fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2
			  ```
	- ## The Trash Theory
		- In the Book, [[@Rubbish Theory: The Creation and Destruction of Value - New Edition: The Creation and Destruction of Value - New Edition]] the author Michael Thompson argues that the value of an object is not inherent to the object itself, but rather a social construct. This is especially true for waste, which is often considered valueless and disposable. However, Thompson contends that waste can be transformed into value through social, cultural, and economic processes. By reevaluating our perceptions of waste and its potential, we can create new systems of value that promote sustainability and resourcefulness. This aims to go beyond teaching the participants how to recycle, but to fundamentally change their relationship to waste and the materials around them.
		- ((679c975f-9f68-40f3-b4b7-1a4cbe3b3870))
			- ```mermaid
			  flowchart TD
			      A[TRANSIENT<br>Value decreases with time] <-.-> B[DURABLE<br>Value increases with time]
			      A --> C[(RUBBISH<br>No value, no time)]
			      B -.-> C
			      C -.-> A
			      C --> B
			  ```
			- The Book establishes 3 fundamental value classes, transient, durable and rubbish. The Categories Transient and durable are no surprise here, they have been around in design theories for quite a while (TODO Cite). A transient object is simply an object expected to decrease in value over time, while a durable object is expected to increase in value over time. The third category, rubbish, is the novel thing introduced here.
	- ## The Archive
	  id:: 67a4ecd5-0907-436c-8f7b-2a24e26baf32
		- The Archive is born to capture a host of processes that typically get lost in the design and making process.
		- DEBUG: For testing purposes, find the generated archive input under [[Pythontest]]
		- The archive is fully reachable under https://archive.petau.net

		- A visualization of the archiving workflow:
		  id:: 67a9eab2-77e7-4da4-bba7-475cd4a47ea3
			- ```mermaid
			  graph TD;
			      A[Archivar] -->|Takes Pictures| B[Document Camera];
			      B --> |Transmits|A1;
			      
			      subgraph Code Evaluation
			          A1[Start] --> B1[Capture Image from Webcam];
			          B1 --> C1[Extract Text using OCR];
			          C1 -->|Tesseract/EasyOCR| D1[Check Readability with textstat];
			          C1 -->|Ollama Vision| E1[Generate Description];
			          B1 --> F1[Detect Markers using SIFT];
			          D1 -->|Meaningful Text| G1[Upload Text to Logseq];
			          E1 --> G1;
			          B1 --> H1[Save Original Image];
			          H1 --> I1[Upload Image to Logseq];
			          F1 --> J1[Save Annotated Image];
			          J1 --> K1[Store in Logseq Assets];
			          G1 --> L1[End];
			          I1 --> L1;
			          K1 --> L1;
			      end
			      L1 --> M[Logseq Export]
			      M --> N[Interactive Website]
			  ```
			- ### The Case for Markdown
    			- For knowledge transfer and archiving, the digital is not always a net positive. 
    			- Things get lost in the www and ever-changing digital landscapes can be frustrating for researchers or historians looking to trace the origins of ideas. 
    			- 
	- ### The Markers
    	- The Markers are a concept to help remove digital aspects from the catalogization process. A marker looks like this: TODO: Add image placeholder
    	- Markers are like little Poker Chips, which can be placed in the frame of the camera. The Camera can then use these markers to understand somecontext of the image being captured. This functions in effect much like a tagging system, but there is noc screen and no digital postprocessing needed. The piece of knowledge is added to the archive already in an ordered fashion, minimizing the upkeep of the archive. This makes the system accessibleat scale in the context of a workshop, where no intimate Database knowledge is needed in order to contribute meaningfully to the corpus. 
	- ## The Workshop Concept
		- ### Reasoning behind the Workshop
			- Plastics pollution is one of the most pressing environmental challenges of our time, yet recycling processes are often monopolized by industrial systems that prioritize economic efficiency over ecological sustainability. The ReShaping Plastics workshop aims to empower participants with hands-on experience in recycling and reimagining plastic waste as a valuable resource, fostering a sense of agency against an otherwise overwhelming global issue.
			
			This workshop is open to participants from all disciplines, requiring no prior experience. Over the course of two sessions, participants will learn to construct a DIY plastic sheet press and explore innovative methods for recycling plastic waste into durable and functional objects. The small group size (maximum 6 participants) ensures an intimate, collaborative environment tailored to the capabilities of the tools provided.
			
			The workshop encourages a shift in perspective, treating plastic not as disposable waste but as a versatile material capable of new forms and functions. By engaging directly with the processes of sorting, shredding, heating, and molding plastic waste, participants will gain practical skills and insights into sustainable design practices and circular economies.
			
			The workshop balances technical instruction with creative exploration, culminating in the production of personalized objects such as engraved cutting boards, modular clamps, or experimental prototypes. Participants will leave with a deeper understanding of plastics' lifecycle and the tools to advocate for and contribute to ecological innovation in their communities.
			
			This is not just a recycling workshop—it's an opportunity to rethink waste, create tangible solutions, and spark a broader dialogue on sustainability and material culture.
		- ### Material studies (_Materialstudien_)
			- As visible here, [[@Bauhaus]] already the 1920s Bauhaus movement pioneered the idea that it might be a pedagogiaclly useful exercise to restrict oneself to a certain set of materials, in order to explore the very base attributes of it. The Bauhaus tradition differentiates between "Materiestudien" and "Materialstudien", the former instigating students to look at the base properties of a material, to facilitate choosing the right material for specific tasks, while in the "Materialstudien" the students got consciously restricted to a single material to bring about novel and unexpected applications of it
			- An example in Paper: [[@Albers Paper Exercises]]
				- ![An example in Paper: [[@Albers Paper Exercises]]](../assets/image_1739183355042_0.png)
			- The present workshop adopts this approach by focusing on the material properties of plastic, encouraging unconventional uses and applications that challenge conventional perceptions of plastic. Here, exploration of techniques is fostered through a specific selection of tools presented to participants. Effectively, a Material study is conducted, where we focus on recycled plastic waste as the sole material but leave personal autonomy in workflow design and choice of method.
		- ## The Exposee
			- This hands-on workshop invites participants to actively address plastic pollution by transforming waste into durable, meaningful objects. Unlike traditional industrial recycling, which often prioritizes economic over ecological concerns, this workshop empowers individuals to reclaim and repurpose plastic in a way that fosters creativity, sustainability, and personal agency.
			  The workshop unfolds in two sessions. In the first, participants will sort, wash, and shred plastic waste using a Precious Plastic Shredder, creating small flakes. These flakes will then be heated in a Panini press, transforming them into a malleable plastic mass, which will be molded using a DIY plastic sheet press. The resulting sheets will be finished with woodworking tools, and participants can add personal engravings with a CNC machine, allowing for unique, patterned designs.
			  The final products, shaped through a combination of heat, pressure, and craftsmanship, will reflect the individual designs and creativity of each participant. Whether through engraving or coloring, participants will gain hands-on experience with the potential of upcycling plastic waste into functional, aesthetic objects.
			  This workshop offers a tangible way to engage with the global issue of plastic pollution, encouraging participants to reconsider the life cycle of everyday materials. It is a way of reformulating transient objects into durable/lasting objects, an alchemical formula for design.
		- ### The Workshop Intent
			- What skills should the participants acquire?
			  
			  The workshop aims to equip participants with the following skills:
			  
			  The intent with the workshop is not educational. It is of course helpful to get to know more details one didn't know about types of plastic, but it is not assumed here that the participants will remember all the details. The intent is to change the participants relationship to waste and the materials around them. The participants should leave the workshop with a different perspective on the materials around them, and the potential of these materials. Just to view Plastics as a material source afterwards is already a significant change in perception.
			  
			  I love used furniture. I love restoring it, cleaning it, acknowledging that i made it possible it can last a few more years instead of going towards the trash. With the german Sperrmüll system, which is handled municipally, in many Towns discarded Objects spend quite a while on the streets before being actually discarded. It is a kind of limbo, the in the original sense of the word, a waiting hall where meaning and value is deducted until one is sorted into their proper category of hell. Despite a varying and disputed legal status, these Limbo-Objects on the streets have quite a following and are often taken in by passing-by people.
			  I also occasionally find some objects of value in these piles. They are kind of a rebalancing mechanism on the valuation economy of objects. I would argue that price is not the only category to measure value in our society, not even an idealized and theoretical one. Taking an about-to-be-discarded object in and attaching a new valuation to it is powerful and an everyday experience i think.
			  
			  A habit forms, one of scanning the environment for these kinds of liminal objects. The perception attunes and through the habit, my success rate of discovery of liminal objects increases.
			  
			  The workshop intends to exploit on this habit-making and perception-activating. The participants should leave the workshop with a renewed habit of scanning their environment for potential materials.
	- ### The ethics code
		- We need to strife to remove the paternalistic and colonial aspects of this scanning
		  What is paternalistic about it?
		  What is colonizing about it?
		  Merely walking the streets with the view of "How can it serve me?" is potentially quite a damaging perspective and i am not advocating for that here.
	- ### The Liminal object
		- What is a liminal object?
		  This is a category not formed by thompson, at least not explicitly. For me, the liminal object is within the transient object category. It is an object that is in the process of being discarded, but has not yet been fully discarded.
	- ### Human-as-Waste
		- [[@The Human-As-Waste, the Labor Theory of Value and Disposability in Contemporary Capitalism]]
		- How does Capitalism play a role with trash production?
			- ((679cab7e-6d44-4fd6-a8c7-e8c7568524b4))
	- The Out of sight out of mind mentality:
	- ((679cac2e-4958-4b9d-9aff-7602e473ff2a))
	- ### Workshop Documentation
		- Find a more detailed documentation in the appendix
	- ### Archival Practices
		- How can many Workshops coalesce into a larger movement? what kind of knowledge needs to be transferred between iterations?
		  Is there a method to be extracted?
		  Could the Process Knowledge be packaged and reduced in order to share on a website?
	- ### Workshop second Iteration
		- Within the context of my work in the studio einszwovier (https://www.gvb-berlin.de/unterricht-plus/arbeitsgemeinschaften/maker-space-studio-einszwovier/) at the Gabriele-von-Bülow Gymnasium, I was able to conduct a second iteration of the workshop. The workshop was conducted with a group of 10 students, aged 14-16, over the course of two days. The students were introduced to the principles of recycling and sustainable design, focusing on the transformation of plastic waste into functional objects. The workshop included hands-on activities such as sorting, shredding, and molding plastic waste, as well as creative exercises to explore the potential of recycled materials.
	- ## Evaluation
		- What are the Criteria? How do we measure them?
		  The evaluation criteria for this thesis and workshop are structured to assess the effectiveness and impact of the proposed solutions. The following points outline the key criteria for evaluation:
		- **Participant Engagement and Transformation**  
		  Evaluate whether participants demonstrate a shift in perception towards plastic waste, viewing it as a valuable resource rather than disposable material.
		- **Technical Feasibility and Usability**  
		  Assess the functionality and accessibility of the developed tools and processes, ensuring they are user-friendly and replicable in diverse settings.
		- **Creative Outcomes and Innovation**  
		  Measure the diversity, functionality, and creativity of the objects produced by participants, reflecting the potential of recycled materials.
		- **Sustainability and Impact**  
		  Examine the workshop's contribution to sustainable practices and its alignment with circular economy principles, including long-term usability and reduction of waste.
		- **Knowledge Transfer and Skill Development**  
		  Analyze the participants' acquisition of new skills, understanding of material lifecycles, and ability to apply the workshop's methods independently.
		- **Community and Collaborative Impact**  
		  Consider how the workshop fosters collaboration and builds networks among participants, encouraging collective action in recycling and sustainability.
		  These criteria will form the foundation for a comprehensive evaluation of the project's success and its potential for broader application. /zotero
	- ## Discussion
		- Has transformation in Participants occurred?
		  
		  TODO: Collect Statements
	- ### Outlook
		- What are the next steps?
		  What could be done further?
		  Workshop format in schools
			- the Archive could be expanded
			- Skill Trees for all kinds of Material transformations could be invented.One idea is to explore expanding the wonderfully gamified Levelling system of Steph Piper [[@Skill seeker: color in, level up, and get inspired]]
	- #### Speculation
		- What might a future application look like?
		  In future workshops, participants will continue to engage in hands-on activities that transform waste materials into functional objects. An area of deeper investigation will be the integration of digital fabrication tools and techniques alongside traditional methods
	- ## Bibliography
		- TODO
	- ## Appendix
		- ### Artist CV
			- Aron Petau (he/him) studies Design and Computation at the Technical University and the University of the Arts Berlin. As a freelance supervisor of makerspaces, his focus lies at the intersection of media and technology education and creative processes.
			  With a background in Cognitive Science, Aron has already worked on several projects related to the digitalization of education. His interest lies primarily in technologies that enable self-empowerment. He is particularly passionate about 3D printing and is researching non-industrialized and decentralized approaches to recycling and reusing plastic sustainably, treating it not as waste but as a valuable resource.
			  Aron is also interested in reflecting on the societal impact of technologies and exploring ways to shape this impact in a collaborative and community-oriented manner.
			- https://aron.petau.net
		- ### Acknowledgments
			- I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Maria Kyrou and Prof. Albert Lang, for their invaluable guidance and support throughout this project. Their expertise and encouragement have been instrumental in shaping my research and practice. I would also like to thank the participants of the ReShaping Plastics workshop for their enthusiasm and creativity, which inspired me to explore new possibilities in recycling and design. Finally, I am grateful to my family and friends for their unwavering encouragement and belief in my work. This thesis would not have been possible without their support.
		- ## Workshop documentation
			- TODO: Insert Photos from Workshops, take excerpts from Archival uploads